docs: adopt the starter pack (#187)
canonical/praecepta: docs/index.md

# Documentation Style Guide

This is a minimal guide to the language and style conventions used
for Canonical documentation projects.

```{eval-rst}
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

> 

Reviewer: The link to self appears on the page, which is odd. This should fix it:

```suggestion
   :hidden:

```

- How-to guide
- Reference
- Explanation

Each type serves a different user need — it is useful to understand the needs being
addressed as these will influence the documentation approach.

Refer to the [official Diátaxis website](https://diataxis.fr/) for more information.

## Spelling

Canonical previously used UK English, but has changed to US English. There are
many small differences between UK and US English, but for the most part it comes
down to spelling.

## Branding

Consistency in branding is important for a number of reasons, including the protection of trademarks where they apply.
For our own products, and those of others we mention frequently, the following guidance applies.

### Ubuntu

When we refer to Ubuntu |oǒ'boǒntoō|, we are usually referring to the distribution, rather than the Ubuntu project itself.

Our convention is to use the name, followed by the release number and, if applicable, 'LTS' to denote that the version
is in Long Term Support. Optionally, you may also further identify the release by its codename (the first or both parts
of the release name) if this is likely to be useful (e.g. some of our products also use the release names to identify

> versions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the release name) if this is likely to be useful For example, some of our products also use the release names to identify
versions.
```

<!-- RULE
#03 Correct use of Ubuntu versions
-->
Some examples of correct usage:

- **Ubuntu 22.04 LTS**
- **Ubuntu 22.10**
- **Ubuntu 23.04 (Lunar Lobster)** _(note case!)_
- **Ubuntu 23.10 (Mantic)**
- **Ubuntu 24.04 LTS (Noble Numbat)**

This also follows on to more specific products, e.g.

> **Ubuntu Server 22.04 LTS**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also applies to more specific products, such as **Ubuntu Server 22.04 LTS**.
```

| LXD               |                               |
| MAAS              | Metal As A Service            |
| MicroCeph         |                               |
| MicroCloud        |                               |
| MicroK8s          |                               |
| MicroOVN          |                               |
| MicroStack        |                               |
| Mir               |                               |
| Multipass         |                               |
| Snapcraft         |                               |
| snapd             |                               |
| Ubuntu Core       |                               |
| Ubuntu Pro        |                               |
| Ubuntu Server     |                               |

<!-- RULE
#05 Correct use of external product names
Note: Removed from written guide, still retained in automation.
-->

## Contractions

Contractions are very common in spoken English and in many types of writing.
Avoiding the use of them entirely makes it difficult to achieve a friendly,
conversational tone. However, we should keep to contractions that are commonly
understood and not part of some regional dialect, and only use them in

> "conversational" parts of the documentation (i.e. explanatory text).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"conversational" parts of the documentation such as explanatory text.
```

Headings are important for navigation, for setting tone and for search indexing. Please bear
in mind the following:

<!-- RULE
#07 Use sentence case in headings
-->
### Sentence case

All headings and headlines should be sentence case. This means that you
should only capitalise the first word unless it falls into one of the categories
outlined below:

 - product names
 - personal names
 - company names
 - brands
 - places
 - Ubuntu Server, not Ubuntu server

**Use:** Do more with Ubuntu
**Don't use:** Do More With Ubuntu

If it is not the actual product name, it should not be capitalised. Never capitalise keywords, technical terms and jargon.

<!-- RULE
#08 Headings must not end in '.'
-->
<!-- RULE
#09 Headings should not contain links
-->
<!-- RULE
#10 Headings should not contain code
-->
<!-- RULE
#11 Headings should not be followed by a subheading
-->
### Other considerations

 - Avoid overusing punctuation in headings. Headings should not end with a period/full point/full stop.
 - Avoid links in headings.
 - Don't overuse `code` styling in headings - it can be useful to document command references, for example, but you should always consider if it is really needed.

>  - Do not skip levels of heading hierarchy (e.g. following an `h1` with an `h3`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Do not skip levels of heading hierarchy. For example, do not follow an `h1` with an `h3`.
```

# tokens:
#   # day-month-year
#   - (0?[1-9]|[12]\d|30|31)[^\w\d\r\n:]{1,2}(0?[1-9]|1[0-2])[^\w\d\r\n:]{1,2}(\d{4}|\d{2})
#   # month-day-year
#   - (0?[1-9]|1[0-2])[^\w\d\r\n:]{1,2}(0?[1-9]|[12]\d|30|31)[^\w\d\r\n:]{1,2}(\d{4}|\d{2})
#   # year-month-day
#   - (\d{4}|\d{2})[^\w\d\r\n:]{1,2}(0?[1-9]|1[0-2])[^\w\d\r\n:]{1,2}(0?[1-9]|[12]\d|30|31)
#   # "1st of January 1970"
#   - \d{1,2}(st|nd|rd|th) of (?:Jan(?:uary)?|Feb(?:ruary)?|Mar(?:ch)?|Apr(?:il)|May|Jun(?:e)|Jul(?:y)|Aug(?:ust)|Sep(?:tember)?|Oct(?:ober)|Nov(?:ember)?|Dec(?:ember)?) \d{4}
#   # "January 1st, 1970"
#   - (?:Jan(?:uary)?|Feb(?:ruary)?|Mar(?:ch)?|Apr(?:il)|May|Jun(?:e)|Jul(?:y)|Aug(?:ust)|Sep(?:tember)?|Oct(?:ober)|Nov(?:ember)?|Dec(?:ember)?) \d{1,2}(st|nd|rd|th)(,|) \d{4}

-->
## Dates

For consistency, we will use the following date format:

* Single day: January 1, 2013  
* Date range within same month: January 1-2, 2013  
* Date range across two or more months: January 1 \- February 2,  2013

<!-- RULE
#13 Numbers below 10 should be spelled out
-->
<!-- RULE
#14 Numbers above 9 should be written in the '1,970' format
-->
## Numbers

Numbers in single figures should be spelled out in most cases. From

> 10 onwards, numbers should be written in digits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10 onward, numbers should be written in digits.
```

Author: Oof, right in my Australian English.

Exceptions to this rule include numbered lists and units of measurement.

When writing out numbers over the 100s, remember to include commas.

**Use:** 7,000

**Don't use:** 7000

<!-- RULE
#15 Do not use $/# prompts in code blocks
-->
<!-- RULE
#16 Avoid inlining comments in code blocks
-->
<!-- RULE
#17 Avoid cade blocks more than 40 lines long
-->
<!-- RULE
#18 Separate input and output code blocks
-->
## Code examples in documentation

> Use prompt marks (e.g. `$` or `#`) in code samples **must** allow users to copy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use of prompt marks such as `$` and `#` in code samples **must** allow users to copy
```

the code. Otherwise prompt marks cause problems for users.

> **DO NOT** use comments in normal bash code. E.g.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**DO NOT** use comments in normal bash code. For example:
```

```bash
juju deploy wordpress
juju deploy ntp-master --to 2   #colocates with wordpress
juju add-relation mysql wordpress
```

This may be a useful comment if you just have a bash script to communicate
information, but we have words! It is clearer, more obvious and more helpful
to simply explain, before after or during the code.

**DO NOT** use long blocks of code. Anything which doesn't comfortably fit
on a screen is too long. Consider *why* you are showing it. Can it be broken
up into parts? Long sections of code are rarely read in documentation. If the
code is an example intended to be used rather than read, offer it as a
download instead.

> **DO** separate commands and output where appropriate. For example, instead of:

Reviewer: Were we going to mention the terminal directive here?

Author: I'm a bit on the fence around connecting the style guide to technical solutions.

I think we should discuss this in the APAC TA standup - and go from there.

To minimise the risk of errors, instruct the reader that such values need to be
substituted, especially when the first placeholder is referenced. There is no
set style for the delimiter: the author should choose something unlikely to be
confusing in the context, and use it consistently.

In longer code blocks the placeholders become more difficult to manage
and easier to overlook. Instead, consider defining the placeholders as
environmental variables. For example:

````
Define the channel for the charms required. For example, to select the stable 
release of 1.30:

```
CHANNEL=1.30/stable
```

Then proceed to fetch the required charms:

```
juju download easyrsa --channel=$CHANNEL
juju download kubernetes-worker --channel=$CHANNEL
...
```

````

This approach has the following advantages:

 - Separates user-supplied data from commands, making it easier to reference
   and explain
 - Enables blocks of code to be copied without modification
 - Reduces the chance of users making mistakes when editing the commands

## Images

An image should not be overly cropped - allow for context.

<!-- RULE
#19 No images linked to Google drive
-->
**DO NOT LINK IMAGES FROM A GOOGLE DRIVE**

> This will only work temporarily. Google Drive can rotate URLs and when a user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is not accessible for external contributors. Also, this will only work temporarily. Google Drive can rotate URLs and when a user
```

 - An additional source of information which is useful but not required
 - A helpful tip that will save effort/time
 - A reminder of some pre-requisite or restriction

**Try to avoid hint and tip admonitions**, as admonitions should be of higher levels or importance.

## Interacting with UI elements

### Screenshots

Do not use screenshots unless there is no better way to better indicate the interaction or interface you are documenting.

A screenshot is not a replacement for clear descriptions in documentation. If an image is well described,
a screenshot shouldn’t be necessary in many situations, and including many screenshots can clutter the
documentation.

<!-- Rule#22
Images must have Alt text
-->
Screenshots also can’t be translated, so they aren’t as accessible to non-native English users or those using translated documentation. Additionally, those using screen-readers won’t be able to access the screenshots without alt-text.

### Using UI elements as the English words

Use UI elements as though they are English words.

For example:

- **Use**: When you’re finished, **Save** your settings.
- **Don't use**: When you’re finished, click **Save** to save your settings.

> Using the UI text as English words is less clear and may not transfer well to certain translated versions.

Reviewer: This was the justification for the original (swapped) advice. Drop this sentence? Unless we have strong justification for the current recommendation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- Use: `See the [Formatting section](#formatting) for guidelines about hyperlink formatting.` 
- Avoid: `See [Formatting](#formatting).`
- Avoid: `See [this section](#formatting).`

Avoid using a URL as the linked text.

- Use: `[Page title](https://page-url.com)`
- Avoid: `[https://page-url.com](https://page-url.com)`

Avoid superfluous links to external pages that could become outdated or
deprecated. External links such as the documentation's upstream project or
repository are fine.

Inform the user the link is external to the current doc set by specifying the source. 

- Use: `To submit an issue related to the code, see the [Contributing guide](www.github.com/org/repo/contributing.md) on GitHub.`
- Avoid: `For more information, see [How to format hyperlinks](www.external-style-guide.com/hyperlinks)`

If clicking the link performs an action, like downloading a file, link the
entire action in the sentence.

- Use: `First, [download file.zip](file.zip)`
- Avoid: `First, download the [file](file.zip)`

## Lists

Use numbered lists sparingly, and ensure that bulleted lists are definitive lists, not examples or subsets of a category.

Numbered lists should be used only when:

> - The order of items matters (e.g., step-by-step instructions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The order of items matters, such as in step-by-step instructions
```
